---
layout:     post
title:      "[Compiler] Syntax Analysis"
toc:        true
categories: [Compiler]
---
## 1. The Role of Parser
Lexer的职责是将"A stream of characters"转化成为"A stream of tokens"，Parser是Lexer的后级，负责赋予
"A stream of tokens"以语法结构，通常为**Parse Tree**，然后将Parse Tree交给Compiler Front End的剩余部分处理。
注意，逻辑上Syntax Analysis阶段只是赋予"A stream of tokens"以语法结构，该结构并不包含任何语义(Semantic)信息，
例如类型信息。

一共有三种类型的Parser：**universal**, **top-down**, **bottom-up**。universal类型的Parser可以解析任何
grammar，但是效率不高；top-down parser自顶(root)向下(leaves)构建Parse Tree，bottom-up parser自底
(leaves)向上(root)构建Parse Tree，二者只能处理grammar的子集，但是对于现代编程语言来说已经足够描述语法结构了。


## 2. Context-Free Grammar
Grammar用来描述Language的Syntax，Syntax更抽象，Grammar更具体，在Compiler系列文章的Parser上下文中有时会混用
二者。这里介绍一种常见的Grammar：**Context-Free Grammar**。

### 2.1 Definition of Context-Free Grammar
A Context-Free Grammar consists of **terminials**, **nonterminals**, a **start symbol** and **productions**.
#### Terminals
> **Terminals** are the basic symbols from which strings are formed. The **term**
> **token name** is a synonym for terminal and frequently we will use the
> word **token** for terminal when it is clear that we are talking about just
> the token name.

#### Nonterminals
> **Nonterminals** are **syntactic variables** that denote sets of strings. 
> Nonterminals impose a hierarchical structure on the language that is key to syntax
> analysis and translation.

#### Start Symbol
> In a grammar, one **nonterminal** is distinguished as the **start symbol**, and
> the set of strings it denotes is the language generated by the grammar.
> Conventionally, the **productions** for the start symbol are listed rst.

#### Productions
> The **productions** of a grammar specify the manner in which the **terminals** 
> and **nonterminals** can be combined to form strings. Each production
> consists of:
> 1. A nonterminal called the **head** or left side of the production; this
> production defines some of the strings denoted by the head.
> 2. The symbol $$\rightarrow$$ Sometimes $$::=$$ has been used in place of the arrow.
> 3. A **body** or right side consisting of zero or more terminals and nonterminals.
> The components of the body describe one way in which
> strings of the nonterminal at the head can be constructed.

如果一个"A sequence of grammar symbol (S)"满足某个grammar (G)，我们就说S is a setence of G.

下面看几个例子：

##### [例1] the grammar defines *if-else statements*

$$
\begin{aligned}
stmt\ &\rightarrow\ \boldsymbol{if}\ (expr)\ \ stmt\ \ \boldsymbol{else}\ \ stmt \\
expr\ &\rightarrow\ ...
\end{aligned}
$$

这个grammar定义了一个*if-else statement*。

* start symbol为$$stmt$$；
* $$stmt$$和$$expr$$为nonterminals；
* $$\boldsymbol{if}$$和$$\boldsymbol{else}$$作为keyword是terminals；

statement
```c
if (cond)
  // do something
else
  // do something
```
is a setence of this grammar，回车换行符已经在Lexical Analysis阶段处理。

##### [例2] the grammar defines simple arithmetic expressions

$$
\begin{aligned}
E\ &\rightarrow\ E\ +\ E\ \vert\ E\ *\ E\ \vert\ -E\ \vert\ (\ E\ )\ \vert\ \boldsymbol{id}\\
\end{aligned}
$$

这个grammar定义了简单的arithmetic expressions。

* start symbol为$$E$$；
* $$E$$、$$term$$为nonterminals；
* $$\boldsymbol{id}$$、operator $$+$$、$$*$$为terminals；

arithemetic expression
```
5 * 2 + 3
```
is a setence of this grammar.

### 2.2 Derivations and Parse Tree
#### 2.2.1 Derivations
Derivation指的是遵循某种Grammar逐步将production head替换成为production body的过程。

##### Notations: $$\Rightarrow$$, $$\overset{*}{\Rightarrow}$$ and $$\overset{+}{\Rightarrow}$$
为了防止歧义，下面以英文介绍Notations。

Consider a nonterminal $$A$$ in the middle of a sequence of grammar symbols, as in $$\alpha A\beta$$,
where $$\alpha$$ and $$\beta$$ are arbitrary strings of grammar symbols. Suppose $$A\ \rightarrow\ \gamma$$
is a production. Then, we write $$\alpha A\beta\ \Rightarrow\ \alpha\gamma\beta$$. The symbol $$\Rightarrow$$
means "derives in one step". When a sequence of derivation steps $$\alpha_1\ \Rightarrow\ \alpha_2\ \Rightarrow\ ...\ \Rightarrow\ \alpha_n$$
rewrites $$\alpha_1$$ to $$\alpha_n$$, we say $$\alpha_1$$ *derives* $$\alpha_n$$.
We use $$\overset{*}{\Rightarrow}$$ to denote "derives in zero or more steps" and $$\overset{+}{\Rightarrow}$$
to denote "derives in one or more steps".

##### Leftmost Derivations and Rightmost Derivations: $$\underset{lm}{\Rightarrow}$$ and $$\underset{rm}{\Rightarrow}$$
* In **leftmost derivations**, the leftmost nonterminal in each sentential is always chosen which is denoted by  $$\underset{lm}{\Rightarrow}$$;
* In **rightmost derivations (aka. canonical derivations)**, the rightmost nonterminal is always chosen which is denoted by $$\underset{rm}{\Rightarrow}$$;

以上面的[例2] simple arithmetic expression语法为例讲解本节讲到的notations：

$$
\begin{aligned}
E\ &\rightarrow\ E\ +\ E\ \vert\ E\ *\ E\ \vert\ -E\ \vert\ (\ E\ )\ \vert\ \boldsymbol{id} \\
\end{aligned}
$$

$$ -(\boldsymbol{id} + \boldsymbol{id}) $$
is a *setence* of simple arighemetic grammar, we can derive from start symbol $$E$$ to this setence in two different processes:

$$
\begin{aligned}
E\ \underset{lm}{\Rightarrow}\ -E \underset{lm}{\Rightarrow}\ -(E + E) \underset{lm}{\Rightarrow}\ -(\boldsymbol{id} + E) \underset{lm}{\Rightarrow}\ -(\boldsymbol{id} + \boldsymbol{id}) \\
\end{aligned}
$$

or

$$
\begin{aligned}
E\ \underset{rm}{\Rightarrow}\ -E \underset{rm}{\Rightarrow}\ -(E + E) \underset{rm}{\Rightarrow}\ -(E + \boldsymbol{id}) \underset{rm}{\Rightarrow}\ -(\boldsymbol{id} + \boldsymbol{id}) \\
\end{aligned}
$$

注意在第三次derive的时候，leftmost derivation先derive的是左侧的$$E$$，而rightmost derivation先derive的是右侧的$$E$$。

#### 2.2.2 Parse Tree 
TODO